= Prepared Statements and Bound Variables

Starting with version 2.4.0, Sequel has support for prepared statements and
bound variables.  No matter which database you are using, the Sequel prepared
statement/bound variable API remains exactly the same.  There is native support
for prepared statements/bound variables on the following databases:

* PostgreSQL (using the pg driver, requires type specifiers)
* MySQL (prepared statements only, as the ruby mysql driver doesn't support
  bound variables)
* SQLite (a new native prepared statement is used for each call, though)
* JDBC (using the postgresql, mysql, or sqlite databases, and possibly others)

Support on other databases is emulated via the usual string interpolation.

== Placeholders

Generally, when using prepared statements (and certainly when using bound
variables), you need to put placeholders in your SQL to indicate where you
want your bound arguments to appear.  Database support and syntax vary
significantly for placeholders (e.g. :name, $1, ?).  Sequel abstracts all of
that and allows you to specify placeholders by using the :$name format for
placeholders, e.g.:

  ds = DB[:items].filter(:name=>:$name)

== Bound Variables

Using bound variables for this query is simple:

  ds.call(:select, :name=>'Jim')

This will do the equivalent of selecting records that have the name 'Jim'. It
returns all records, and can take a block that is passed to Dataset#all.

Deleting or returning the first record works similarly:

  ds.call(:first, :name=>'Jim') # First record with name 'Jim'
  ds.call(:delete, :name=>'Jim') # Delete records with name 'Jim'

For inserting/updating records, you should also specify a value hash, which
may itself contain placeholders:

  # Insert record with 'Jim', note that the previous filter is ignored
  ds.call(:insert, {:name=>'Jim'}, :name=>:$name)
  # Change name to 'Bob' for all records with name of 'Jim'
  ds.call(:update, {:name=>'Jim', :new_name=>'Bob'}, :name=>$:new_name)

== Prepared Statements

Prepared statement support is similar to bound variable support, but you
use Dataset#prepare with a name, and Dataset#call later with the values:

  ds = DB[:items].filter(:name=>:$name)
  ps = ds.prepare(:select, :select_by_name)
  ps.call(:name=>'Jim')
  DB.call(:select_by_name, :name=>'Jim') # same as above

The Dataset#prepare method returns a prepared statement, and also stores a
copy of the prepared statement in the database for later use.  For insert
and update queries, the hash to insert/update is passed to prepare:

  ps1 = DB[:items].prepare(:insert, :insert_with_name, :name=>:$name)
  ps1.call(:name=>'Jim')
  DB.call(:insert_with_name, :name=>'Jim') # same as above
  ds = DB[:items].filter(:name=>:$name)
  ps2 = ds.prepare(:update, :update_name, :name=>:$new_name)
  ps2.call(:name=>'Jim', :new_name=>'Bob')
  DB.call(:update_name, :name=>'Jim', :new_name=>'Bob') # same as above

== Database support

=== PostgreSQL

If you are using the ruby-postgres or postgres-pr driver, PostgreSQL uses the
default emulated support.  If you are using ruby-pg, there is native support,
but it requires type specifiers most of the time.  This is easy if you have
direct control over the SQL string, but since Sequel abstracts that, the types
have to be specified another way.  This is done by adding a __* suffix to the
placeholder symbol (e.g. :$name__text, which will be compiled to "$1::text"
in the SQL).  Prepared statements are always server side.

=== SQLite

SQLite supports bound variables and prepared statements exactly the same, since
a new native prepared statement is created and executed for each call.

=== MySQL

The MySQL ruby driver does not support bound variables, so the the bound
variable methods fall back to string interpolation.  It uses server side
prepared statements.

=== JDBC

JDBC supports both prepared statements and bound variables.  Whether these
are server side or client side depends on the JDBC driver.  For PostgreSQL
over JDBC, you can add the prepareThreshold=N parameter to the connection
string, which will use a server side prepared statement after N calls to
the prepared statement.

=== All Others

Support is emulated using interpolation.
