= Demo of how to get a rails app up and running on Heroku with Basic tests and fixtures:

{The following}[https://github.com/BKSpurgeon/testing_in_sequel] gives you a very basic app which shows you how to get started:
(i) Sequel
(ii) Minitest (not minitest spec)
(iii) Rails, and 
(iv) instructions on how you can deploy it to a service like Heroku.


=== Get the App up

* I have used the {sequel_rails gem}[https://github.com/TalentBox/sequel-rails] to get started. Follow their instructions.


=== Setting up a test with fixtures

* You may create a +test/sequel_test_case.rb+ file which contains - and from which you can derive all your test classes. 

    DB = Sequel.postgres # replace with your database.
    class SequelTestCase < ActiveSupport::TestCase # or you can inherit from Minitest::Test
      def run(*args, &block)
        DB.transaction(:rollback=>:always, :auto_savepoint=>true){super} # ensures your database is clean after tests are run.
      end
    end

But if you are using the fixtures_dependency gem, then you can add the following in your +/test/test_helper.rb+ file instead:

    ENV['RAILS_ENV'] ||= 'test'
    require_relative '../config/environment'
    require 'rails/test_help'
    require 'fixture_dependencies/helper_methods'

    class ActiveSupport::TestCase
      # Run tests in parallel with specified workers
      parallelize(workers: :number_of_processors)

      # Add more helper methods to be used by all tests here...
      include FixtureDependencies::HelperMethods

      FixtureDependencies.fixture_path = './test/fixtures'

      def run(*args, &block)
        Sequel::Model.db.transaction(:rollback=>:always){super}
      end
    end

=== Adding a model / scaffold

* Create an Organisation scaffold: rails g scaffold Organisation name.

Don't forget to add a plugin so that it works just like rails:

    # app/models/organisation.rb
    class Organisation < Sequel::Model
      Sequel::Model.plugin :active_model
    end

The fixture I have created is an +organisation.yml+ file located in +text/fixtures/organisation.yml+. 

    one:
      name: MyString

    two:
      name: MyString


=== Adding a test

Create a basic test file: +test/models/organisation_test.rb+

    require 'test_helper'
    require 'sequel_test_case'
    require 'fixture_dependencies/test_unit/sequel'

    class OrganisationTest < ActiveSupport::TestCase
      def test_organisation_name
        organisation = load(:organisation__one)
        assert_equal(organisation.name, "BadBoys")
      end
    end

Go to your terminal and run +bin/rake+ and the tests should run!

=== Heroku instructions

Some of you may want it to work on Heroku. That's simple enough. First create the app in heroku (or on the heroku CLI).

* Go to +/config.ru+ file (create one if it doesn't exist), and make sure it looks something like this:

    # This file is used by Rack-based servers to start the application.
    require_relative 'config/environment'
    require 'sequel'
    Sequel.connect( ENV['DATABASE_URL'])
    run Rails.application

* Secondly, you need to {provision a database with herou}[https://devcenter.heroku.com/articles/heroku-postgresql#provisioning-heroku-postgres]. Heroku will supply you with the relevant +DATABASE_URL+ string. If you have the heroku CLI installed you can bang the following into your terminal:

    heroku addons:create heroku-postgresql:hobby-dev

* Now you can run:  git push heroku master.
* Make sure you run an outstanding migrations: heroku run rake db:migrate.
* Then you should be able to and check out your site. You can check on the one I created {here}[https://testingsequel.herokuapp.com/]. 


=== Demo app is publicly available:

Here it is: {https://github.com/BKSpurgeon/testing_in_sequel}[https://github.com/BKSpurgeon/testing_in_sequel]


